

Sivakumar2011 - Notch Signaling Pathway

Notch is a transmembrane receptor that mediates local cell-cell communication
and coordinates a signaling cascade. It plays a key role in modulating cell
fate decisions throughout the development of invertebrate and vertebrate
species and the misregulation leads to a number of human diseases.

References:

  * [Notch signaling: from the outside in.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/11112321)
  * [Notch signaling in hematopoiesis and early lymphocyte development.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/12366684)
  * [An overview of the Notch signalling pathway.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/12651094)
  * [Notch and cancer: best to avoid the ups and downs.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/12676578)
  * [Notch signaling: control of cell communication and cell fate.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/14973298)

This model is described in the article:

[A systems biology approach to model neural stem cell regulation by notch,
shh, wnt, and EGF signaling pathways.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/21978399)

Sivakumar KC, Dhanesh SB, Shobana S, James J, Mundayoor S.

Omics: a Journal of Integrative Biology. 2011; 15(10):729-737

Abstract:

The Notch, Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), Wnt, and EGF pathways have long been known to
influence cell fate specification in the developing nervous system. Here we
attempted to evaluate the contemporary knowledge about neural stem cell
differentiation promoted by various drug-based regulations through a systems
biology approach. Our model showed the phenomenon of DAPT-mediated antagonism
of Enhancer of split [E(spl)] genes and enhancement of Shh target genes by a
SAG agonist that were effectively demonstrated computationally and were
consistent with experimental studies. However, in the case of model simulation
of Wnt and EGF pathways, the model network did not supply any concurrent
results with experimental data despite the fact that drugs were added at the
appropriate positions. This paves insight into the potential of crosstalks
between pathways considered in our study. Therefore, we manually developed a
map of signaling crosstalk, which included the species connected by
representatives from Notch, Shh, Wnt, and EGF pathways and highlighted the
regulation of a single target gene, Hes-1, based on drug-induced simulations.
These simulations provided results that matched with experimental studies.
Therefore, these signaling crosstalk models complement as a tool toward the
discovery of novel regulatory processes involved in neural stem cell
maintenance, proliferation, and differentiation during mammalian central
nervous system development. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a
simple crosstalk map that highlights the differential regulation of neural
stem cell differentiation and underscores the flow of positive and negative
regulatory signals modulated by drugs.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000396](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000396).

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024).

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

